== Arguments parsing.

Executable file merb that every Merb user have seen for sure, looks like this:

<pre>
#!/usr/bin/env ruby
require "merb-core"

if ARGV[0] && ARGV[0] =~ /^[^-]/
  ARGV.push "-H"
end 

unless %w[-a --adapter -i --irb-console -r --script-runner].any? { |o| ARGV.index(o) }
  ARGV.push *%w[-a mongrel]
end

Merb.start
</pre>

This means that merb uses Mongrel adapter by default and fun starts in Merb.start.
What does Merb.start do? 	It parses and sets up application config, then runs boot
and does rackup.

Arguments can be passed as either Hash or array (ARGV in default merb script),
in latter case arguments are parsed. In both cases Merb::Config.setup is called.

Merb::Config is a decorator around configuration Hash. It delegates most of
common operations you expect to see on a Hash-like object to underlying Hash,
but also has a dozen of default configuration options and means to parse/update
configuration.

Lets start with default configuration settings:

Merb::Config.defaults (lib/merb-core/config.rb):
<pre>
# ==== Returns
# Hash:: The defaults for the config.
def defaults
  @defaults ||= {
    :host                   => "0.0.0.0",
    :port                   => "4000",
    :adapter                => "runner",
    :reload_classes         => true,
    :environment            => "development",
    :merb_root              => Dir.pwd,
    :use_mutex              => true,
    :session_id_key         => "_session_id",
    :log_delimiter          => " ~ ",
    :log_auto_flush         => false,
    :disabled_components    => [],
    :deferred_actions       => [],
    :verbose                => false
  }
end
</pre>

Although most of these options are well named and explain their purpose but they are not
complete so let's be explicit and briefly describe each of options Merb core knows
about and uses:

Server & environment options:

 * _adapter_ is Rack adapter (more on Rack machinery later) and can be one of
   mongrel, thin, ebb, swiftiplied_mongrel, evented_mongrel, webrick or irb
   (Merb console). Usually passed from command line or in spec helper.

 * _app_ is a Rack application used by Merb Rack adapter.	Not supposed to be
   set manually.

 * _cluster_ is a number of Merb instances in a cluster you want to run.	 

 * _daemonize_ tells Merb to detach from tty and operate in child process.

 * _deferred\_actions_ is an array of symbols that specify which actions in the
   application take a long time to execute and should be deferred by
   event-driven servers (see below).

 * _disabled\_components_ is a list of framework components that you can exclude
   from being loaded to save some memory on stuff your application does not use.
 
 * _environment_ is environment you start Merb application in, usually one of
   development, testing, production but you can add any environment you want
   like stage1, stage2, prerelease and hostile_martian_environment.

 * _exception\_details_ is a boolean telling Merb if it should show detailed
   exception backtrace in the browser when the trouble strikes.

 * _framework_ is a Hash that holds application components layout.
	 
 * _group_ is an OS group Merb application runs from.	 
	 
 * _host_ and port are host and port Ruby server runs on.

 * _ignore\_tampered\_cookies_ indicates Merb to not raise exception when cookie integrity check fails.
	 
 * _init\_file_ is initialization file path.

 * _log\_auto\_flush_ specifies if logger flushes write buffer immediately (value is true) or once
   in a while. FIXME: when exactly?

 * _log\_delimiter_ lets you change log records delimiter (not used that often).

 * _log\_file_ is a path to file Merb logger writes to.

 * _log\_level_ sets logger level, from :info to :fatal. Defaults to :error for production environment.

 * _memory\_session\_ttl_ is a TTL (time to live) period for memory session storage.

 * _merb\_root_ is a directory that considered Merb application's root.

 * _path\_prefix_ is global path application uses. This is stripped out by Rack before routing the request.

 * _pid\_file_ specifies location of pid file.

 * _rackup_ is a rackup file path. By default Merb loads rack.rb in config directory.

 * _reload\_classes_ specifies if Merb reloads application classes on each request or caches them.

 * _reload\_templates_ supposed to let you avoid templates inlining and reload them
   on every request. NoOp at the moment of writing.

 * _reload\_time_ is a period of class reload, defaults to 0.5 second.

 * _router\_file_ is name of the router file, default is 'router.rb'.	 

 * _session\_cookie\_domain_ is a domain used for cookies.

 * _session\_expiry_ is session expiration period, defaults to 2 weeks.

 * _session\_id\_key_ is session identifier.

 * _session\_secret\_key_ is session identifier salt.

 * _session\_store_ is default session storage, one of memcache, memory, datamapper, sequel or activerecord (registered by plugins).

 * _session\_stores_ is array of additional session stores in case you really need them. 
	 
 * _testing_ is a boolean flag indicating if Merb runs in testing environment (for instance, on test suite run).

 * _use\_mutex_ specifies if Merb should use mutex lock for action dispatch. If you use not threadsafe library (like ActiveRecord), you probably want to turn it on. If all of your application code is thread-safe, feel free to turn it off and have a performance gain.

 * _user_ is an OS user Merb application runs from.

 * _verbose_ specifies if extra output should be printed when Merb starts server and boots.

Note that by default Merb uses current working directory and mutex lock is ON by default.
Logger does not flush automatically unless you (kindly) ask Merb about it.

FIXME: when it's flushed, on what events?

If you noted that environment and testing options overlap, you probably wonder
which takes precedence. The answer is testing. If Merb sees that testing or
$TESTING global variable is set to true, it resets environment to "test".

Here is how it looks like in the source:

Merb.testing? (lib/merb-core.rb):
<pre>
# ==== Returns
# Boolean:: True if Merb environment is testing for instance,
# Merb is running with RSpec, Test::Unit of other testing facility.
def testing?
  $TESTING || Merb::Config[:testing]
end

# Set the environment if it hasn't already been set.
Merb.environment ||= ENV['MERB_ENV'] || Merb::Config[:environment] || (Merb.testing? ? 'test' : 'development')
</pre>


Two more things that probably need some explaination are disabled components and
deferred actions. Disabled components are parts or dependencies of Merb that you
can leave out: like native JSON gem (for instance, if your Merb application does
not use JSON at all, it makes no sense to waste memory). Actually the only component
in merb-core that can be left out at the moment of writing is JSON gem, set disabled_components to [:json]
if you do not want Merb to load it.

Deferred actions is a way to specify which actions in the application take long time to execute and should be
deferred: the idea is that event-driven webservers (Thin, Ebb) that are usually faster than
Mongrel will spawn a thread to run deferred actions so event loop is not stopped
and server can continue serving requests. Usually very useful for file upload actions.

Verbose options makes Merb print to STDOUT extra information on what's going on.
If you want really really verbose information (for instance, want to know what compiled
routes look like), set $DEBUG variable to true in config file.

Merb::Config.parse_args parses arguments and merges them into default configuration
using Merb::Config.setup. Ruby has a good library for parsing command line arguments
called OptParse and that's what parse_args uses under the covers.
