h1. Framework boot.

To load all framework classes and start serving requests, Merb runs a number of callable
objects known as bootloaders. Every bootloader in the chain has it's own purpose: some
set up framework directories structure, some load classes, some inline templates. They
all will be covered a bit later.

Merb Bootloader is any Ruby class that responds to :run.
Here is an example of bootloader from Merb core that initializes Merb logger:

Merb::BootLoader::Logger (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):

<pre><code>
# Set up the logger.
#
# Place the logger inside of the Merb log directory (set up in
# Merb::BootLoader::BuildFramework)
class Merb::BootLoader::Logger < Merb::BootLoader

  # Sets Merb.logger to a new logger created based on the config settings.
  def self.run
    Merb.logger = Merb::Logger.new(Merb.log_file, Merb::Config[:log_level], Merb::Config[:log_delimiter], Merb::Config[:log_auto_flush])
    print_warnings
  end
  
  def self.print_warnings
    if Gem::Version.new(Gem::RubyGemsVersion) < Gem::Version.new("1.1")
      Merb.logger.warn! "Please upgrade your Rubygems to the latest version"      
    end
  end
end
</code></pre>

Bootloaders in Merb are run in certain order which is very important. You cannot load classes unless
framework layout is not set, you cannot do rackup unless you set up logger, and so on. So bootloaders
in the chain are ordered.

Because there's just one requirement for a class to be useable as bootloader, you may wonder how this
order is specified. Very simple. In Ruby classes are notified when they are subclassed. So base bootloder
actually is able to keep track of it's subclasses, and add them to the list. Yes, we were telling you
lies: bootloaders actually must inherit from Merb::Bootloader, but it's usually not a big deal.

Here is how it looks like in Merb core:

Merb::Bootloader.inherited (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):

<pre><code>
# Adds the inheriting class to the list of subclasses in a position
# specified by the before and after methods.
#
# ==== Parameters
# klass<Class>:: The class inheriting from Merb::BootLoader.
def inherited(klass)
  subclasses << klass.to_s
  super
end
</code></pre>


All said in paragraph above means plugin developers can hook into framework boot
process, for instance, to load ORM classes at the right moment, so no crazy monkeypatching or Dark Magic
is required. Simple is always better than complex.

Again, some code to make it 100% clear:

Merb::Bootloader (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):

<pre><code>
# ==== Parameters
# klass<~to_s>::
#   The boot loader class after which this boot loader should be run.
#
#---
# @public
def after(klass)
  move_klass(klass, 1)
end

# ==== Parameters
# klass<~to_s>::
#   The boot loader class before which this boot loader should be run.
#
#---
# @public
def before(klass)
  move_klass(klass, 0)
end

# Move a class that is inside the bootloader to some place in the Array,
# relative to another class.
#
# ==== Parameters
# klass<~to_s>::
#   The klass to move the bootloader relative to
# where<Integer>::
#   0 means insert it before; 1 means insert it after
def move_klass(klass, where)
  index = Merb::BootLoader.subclasses.index(klass.to_s)
  if index
    Merb::BootLoader.subclasses.delete(self.to_s)
    Merb::BootLoader.subclasses.insert(index + where, self.to_s)
  end
end
</code></pre>


Here is a complete example of a bootloader from merb-slices:

Merb::Slices::Loader (merb-more/merb-slices/lib/merb-slices.rb):

<pre><code>
  # Load Slice classes before the app's classes are loaded.
  #
  # This allows the application to override/merge any slice-level classes.
  class Merb::Slices::Loader < Merb::BootLoader

    before LoadClasses

    class << self

      # Gather all slices from search path and gems and load their classes.
      def run
        Merb::Slices.register_slices_from_search_path! if auto_register?
        Merb::Slices.each_slice { |slice| slice.load_slice }
      end
      
      # Load a single file and its requirements.
      #
      # @param file<String> The file to load.
      def load_file(file)
        Merb::BootLoader::LoadClasses.load_file file
      end
      
      # Remove a single file and the classes loaded by it from ObjectSpace.
      #
      # @param file<String> The file to load.
      def remove_file(file)
        Merb::BootLoader::LoadClasses.remove_file file
      end
        
      # Load classes from given paths - using path/glob pattern.
      #
      # @param *paths <Array> Array of paths to load classes from - may contain glob pattern
      def load_classes(*paths)
        Merb::BootLoader::LoadClasses.load_classes paths
      end
    
      # Reload the router - takes all_slices into account to load slices at runtime.
      def reload_router!
        Merb::BootLoader::LoadClasses.reload_router!
      end
      
      # Slice-level paths for all loaded slices.
      #
      # @return <Array[String]> Any slice-level paths that have been loaded.
      def slice_paths
        paths = []
        Merb::Slices.each_slice { |slice| paths += slice.collected_slice_paths }
        paths
      end
      
      # App-level paths for all loaded slices.
      #
      # @return <Array[String]> Any app-level paths that have been loaded.
      def app_paths
        paths = []
        Merb::Slices.each_slice { |slice| paths += slice.collected_app_paths }
        paths
      end
      
      private
      
      # Whether slices from search paths should be registered automatically.
      # Defaults to true if not explicitly set.
      def auto_register?
        Merb::Plugins.config[:merb_slices][:auto_register] || !Merb::Plugins.config[:merb_slices].key?(:auto_register)
      end
      
    end

  end
</code></pre>

This before class method call places Merb::Slices::Loader bootloader before Merb::BootLoader::LoadClasses.

Now once bootloaders chain is pretty much explained, let's have a look at each bootloder in merb-core in turn.

h2. Merb::Bootloader::Logger initializes logger.

Obviously logger has to be initialized early on so Merb::BootLoader::Logger is the first logger in the chain
in merb-core. It uses logger-related parameters from Merb::Config:

<pre><code>
# Set up the logger.
#
# Place the logger inside of the Merb log directory (set up in
# Merb::BootLoader::BuildFramework)
class Merb::BootLoader::Logger < Merb::BootLoader

  # Sets Merb.logger to a new logger created based on the config settings.
  def self.run
    Merb.logger = Merb::Logger.new(Merb.log_file, Merb::Config[:log_level], Merb::Config[:log_delimiter], Merb::Config[:log_auto_flush])
    print_warnings
  end
  
  def self.print_warnings
    if Gem::Version.new(Gem::RubyGemsVersion) < Gem::Version.new("1.1")
      Merb.logger.warn! "Merb requires Rubygems 1.1 and later. Please upgrade RubyGems with gem update --system."
    end
  end
end
</code></pre>

The Merb drops pid file if it's running daemonized or with several instances clustered:

<pre><code>
# Stores pid file.
#
# Only run if daemonization or clustering options specified on start.
# Port is taken from Merb::Config and must be already set at this point.
class Merb::BootLoader::DropPidFile <  Merb::BootLoader
  class << self

    # Stores a PID file if Merb is running daemonized or clustered.
    def run
      Merb::Server.store_pid(Merb::Config[:port]) if Merb::Config[:daemonize] || Merb::Config[:cluster]
    end
  end
end
</code></pre>

This does nothing fancy, just creates directory where pid file is supposed to be stored and
writes own process identifier into that file:

Merb::Server.store_pid (lib/merb-core/server.rb):

<pre><code>
# Stores a PID file on the filesystem.
# This uses :pid_file options from configuration when provided
# or merb.<port>.pid in log directory by default.
#
# ==== Parameters
# port<~to_s>::
#   The port of the Merb process to whom the the PID file belongs to.
#
# ==== Alternatives
# If Merb::Config[:pid_file] has been specified, that will be used
# instead of the port based PID file.
def store_pid(port)
  pidfile = pid_file(port)
  puts "Storing pid file to #{pidfile}..."
  FileUtils.mkdir_p(File.dirname(pidfile)) unless File.directory?(File.dirname(pidfile))
  puts "Created directory, writing process id..." if Merb::Config[:verbose]
  File.open(pidfile, 'w'){ |f| f.write("#{Process.pid}") }
end
</code></pre>

One unanswered question here is how path to pid file is calculated. Let's see:

Merb::Server.store_pid (lib/merb-core/server.rb):

<pre><code>
# Gets the pid file for the specified port.
#
# ==== Parameters
# port<~to_s>::
#   The port of the Merb process to whom the the PID file belongs to.
#
# ==== Returns
# String::
#   Location of pid file for specified port. If clustered and pid_file option
#   is specified, it adds the port value to the path.
def pid_file(port)
  if Merb::Config[:pid_file]
    pidfile = Merb::Config[:pid_file]
    if Merb::Config[:cluster]
      ext = File.extname(Merb::Config[:pid_file])
      base = File.basename(Merb::Config[:pid_file], ext)
      dir = File.dirname(Merb::Config[:pid_file])
      File.join(dir, "#{base}.#{port}#{ext}")
    else
      Merb::Config[:pid_file]
    end
  else
    pidfile = Merb.log_path / "merb.#{port}.pid"
    Merb.log_path / "merb.#{port}.pid"
  end
end

# Get a list of the pid files.
#
# ==== Returns
# Array::
#   List of pid file paths. If not clustered, array contains a single path.
def pid_files
  if Merb::Config[:pid_file]
    if Merb::Config[:cluster]
      ext = File.extname(Merb::Config[:pid_file])
      base = File.basename(Merb::Config[:pid_file], ext)
      dir = File.dirname(Merb::Config[:pid_file])
      Dir[dir / "#{base}.*#{ext}"]
    else
      [ Merb::Config[:pid_file] ]
    end
  else
    Dir[Merb.log_path / "merb.*.pid"]
  end
 end
</code></pre>

It's pretty straightforward. If pid_file option is set up startup from command like (because at this point
in boot process config file is not loaded yet), it is used. If not, Merb uses port of the instance to
make pid file name unique and places it under log directory.

Second method shows how pid files list is collected using range of ports Merb cluster uses.

Next bootloader sets up "some useful defaults" as docstring says:

Merb::Bootloader (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):

<pre><code>
# Setup some useful defaults
class Merb::BootLoader::Defaults < Merb::BootLoader
  def self.run
    Merb::Request.http_method_overrides.concat([
      proc { |c| c.params[:_method] },
      proc { |c| c.env['HTTP_X_HTTP_METHOD_OVERRIDE'] }
    ])
  end
end
</code></pre>


FIXME: explain it.

h2. BuildFramework bootloader.

Next framework paths are set up. Merb uses Rails-like application structure
by default but there are "flat" (config,  application file and views) and
"very flat" (Sinatra or Camping like one file applications) layouts.
To make Merb work with different application layouts, paths to components
are configurable if you need it. This is what BuildFramework bootloader does.
It tries to load framework layout config, if it's not present, default structure
is used.

Merb uses :framework configuration key to find out what layout to use: where to look
for models, for views and so forth. This is how you can make Merb accompany
your existing Rails applications to handle operations that Merb does better.
For instance, if you build an API service, you want to tell Merb to use your existing
Rails application models, libraries in lib and so forth.

Merb::Config[:framework] is supposed to be a Hash with keys named after application
components, like :model, :config, :view and so forth.
Plugins may also add other components. For instance, merb-mailer and merb-parts
use :mailer and :parts layout components.

Source code of that bootloader is very simple:

Merb::BootLoader::BuildFramework (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):

<pre><code>
# ==== Example
#   Merb::Config[:framework] = {
#     :view   => Merb.root / "views",
#     :model  => Merb.root / "models",
#     :lib    => Merb.root / "lib",
#     :public => [Merb.root / "public", nil]
#     :router => [Merb.root / "config", "router.rb"]
#   }
#
# That will set up a flat directory structure with the config files and
# controller files under Merb.root, but with models, views, and lib with their
# own folders off of Merb.root.
class Merb::BootLoader::BuildFramework < Merb::BootLoader
  class << self

    # Builds the framework directory structure.
    def run
      build_framework
    end

    # This method should be overridden in init.rb before Merb.start to set up
    # a different framework structure.
    def build_framework
      if File.exists?(Merb.root / "config" / "framework.rb")
        require Merb.root / "config" / "framework"
      elsif File.exists?(Merb.root / "framework.rb")
        require Merb.root / "framework"
      else
        Merb::BootLoader.default_framework
      end
      (Merb::Config[:framework] || {}).each do |name, path|
        path = Array(path)
        Merb.push_path(name, path.first, path.length == 2 ? path[1] : "**/*.rb")
      end
    end
  end
end
</code></pre>

Default framework layout can be inferred from Merb::BootLoader.default_framework.

Merb::BootLoader.default_framework (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):

<pre><code>
# Set up the default framework
#
# ==== Returns
# nil
#
#---
# @public
def default_framework
  %w[view model helper controller mailer part].each do |component|
    Merb.push_path(component.to_sym, Merb.root_path("app/#{component}s"))
  end
  Merb.push_path(:application,  Merb.root_path("app/controllers/application.rb"))
  Merb.push_path(:config,       Merb.root_path("config"), nil)
  Merb.push_path(:router,       Merb.dir_for(:config), (Merb::Config[:router_file] || "router.rb"))
  Merb.push_path(:lib,          Merb.root_path("lib"), nil)
  Merb.push_path(:log,          Merb.log_path, nil)
  Merb.push_path(:public,       Merb.root_path("public"), nil)
  Merb.push_path(:stylesheet,   Merb.dir_for(:public) / "stylesheets", nil)
  Merb.push_path(:javascript,   Merb.dir_for(:public) / "javascripts", nil)
  Merb.push_path(:image,        Merb.dir_for(:public) / "images", nil)
  nil
end
</code></pre>

It would benefit you at this point to spend some time on helper methods, so
lets get to it.

Merb.push_path registers path and glob for framework component, in other words,
tells Merb where to look for models, views, router file and so forth. Actual loading
is done by a separate bootloader that will be discussed later.

Merb.push_path (lib/merb-core.rb):

<pre><code>
# ==== Examples
# This method gives you a way to build up your own application
# structure, for instance, to reflect the structure Rails
# uses to simplify transition of legacy application, you can
# set it up like this:
#
# Merb.push_path(:model,      Merb.root / "app" / "models",      "**/*.rb")
# Merb.push_path(:mailer,     Merb.root / "app" / "models",      "**/*.rb")
# Merb.push_path(:controller, Merb.root / "app" / "controllers", "**/*.rb")
# Merb.push_path(:view,       Merb.root / "app" / "views",       "**/*.rb")
#
# ==== Parameters
# type<Symbol>:: The type of path being registered (i.e. :view)
# path<String>:: The full path
# file_glob<String>::
#   A glob that will be used to autoload files under the path. Defaults to
#   "**/*.rb".
def push_path(type, path, file_glob = "**/*.rb")
  enforce!(type => Symbol)
  load_paths[type] = [path, file_glob]
end
</code></pre>

Merb.dir_for is a reader for registered component paths.

Merb.dir_for (lib/merb-core.rb):

<pre><code>
# ==== Parameters
# type<Symbol>:: The type of path to retrieve directory for, e.g. :view.
#
# ==== Returns
# String:: The directory for the requested type.
def dir_for(type)  Merb.load_paths[type].first end
</code></pre>


Merb.root_path calculates path relative to Merb.root.

Merb.root_path (lib/merb-core.rb):

<pre><code>
# ==== Parameters
# *path::
#   The relative path (or list of path components) to a directory under the
#   root of the application.
#
# ==== Returns
# String:: The full path including the root.
#
# ==== Examples
#   Merb.root = "/home/merb/app"
#   Merb.path("images") # => "/home/merb/app/images"
#   Merb.path("views", "admin") # => "/home/merb/app/views/admin"
#---
# @public
def root_path(*path) File.join(root, *path)                       end
</code></pre>



h2. Dependencies bootloader.

Dependencies bootloader loads init file and framework/application
dependencies. The following actions are done in sequence:

 * init file path is calculated
 * init file is loaded unless it's listed in disabled components
 * environment-specific init file path is calculated unless init file is listed in disabled components
 * environment-specific init file is loaded unless init file is listed in disabled components
 * JSON gem is loaded unless it's listed in disabled components
 * dependencies listed in init file are loaded
 * logger is updated to use new stream or file that might have been specified in init file

Init file path can be configured (configuration key, as previously mentioned,
is :init_file). If it's not, Merb tries to find init.rb under config directory
(Merb.dir_for(:config)).

Environment-specific init file is only loaded if it exists. It's path calculated as
config directory / "environments" / environment name plus .rb extension. For instance,
if Merb runs in stage2 environment, it will be looking for a env-specific init file
at config/environments/stage2.rb (assuming nobody uses custom config directory path).
If for some reason Merb.environment is nil (probably never happens unless you do nasty
things), env-specific init file is not loaded.

JSON gem is one optional dependency required next unless it's disabled (listed in
Merb.disabled_components; use Merb.disable :json instead of direct operation on it). Another optional component is init file. Some generators or specific tasks
need no load init file. You can tell Merb not load it using Merb.disable(:initfile).

When init files (init.rb and env-specific file from config/environments) are loaded, and application dependencies are known to Merb,
it runs through dependencies list and loads them one by one using Kernel.load_dependency.
Again, because init file may specify additional logger configuration, logger is updated as soon as init file is loaded.

Merb::BootLoader::Dependencies (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):
<pre><code>
class Merb::BootLoader::Dependencies < Merb::BootLoader

  # ==== Returns
  # Array[Gem::Dependency]:: The dependencies regiestered in init.rb.
  #
  # @api plugin
  cattr_accessor :dependencies
  self.dependencies = []

  # Load the init_file specified in Merb::Config or if not specified, the
  # init.rb file from the Merb configuration directory, and any environment
  # files, which register the list of necessary dependencies and any
  # after_app_loads hooks.
  #
  # Dependencies can hook into the bootloader process itself by using
  # before or after insertion methods. Since these are loaded from this
  # bootloader (Dependencies), they can only adapt the bootloaders that
  # haven't been loaded up until this point.
  #
  # ==== Returns
  # nil
  #
  # @api plugin
  def self.run
    set_encoding
    # this is crucial: load init file with all the preferences
    # then environment init file, then start enabling specific
    # components, load dependencies and update logger.
    unless Merb::disabled?(:initfile)
      load_initfile 
      load_env_config
    end
    enable_json_gem unless Merb::disabled?(:json)
    load_dependencies
    update_logger
    nil
  end

  # Load each dependency that has been declared so far.
  # 
  # ==== Returns
  # nil
  #
  # @api private
  def self.load_dependencies
    dependencies.each { |dependency| Kernel.load_dependency(dependency) }
    nil
  end

  # Loads json or json_pure and requires it.
  #
  # ==== Returns
  # nil
  def self.enable_json_gem
    gem "json"
    require "json/ext"
  rescue LoadError
    gem "json_pure"
    require "json/pure"
  end

  # Resets the logger and sets the log_stream to Merb::Config[:log_file] 
  # if one is specified, falling back to STDOUT.
  #
  # ==== Returns
  # nil
  #
  # @api private
  def self.update_logger
    Merb.reset_logger!

    # If log file is given, use it and not log stream we have.
    if Merb::Config[:log_file]
      raise "log file should be a string, got: #{Merb::Config[:log_file].inspect}" unless Merb::Config[:log_file].is_a?(String)
      STDOUT.puts "Logging to file at #{Merb::Config[:log_file]}" unless Merb.testing?
      Merb::Config[:log_stream] = File.open(Merb::Config[:log_file], "w+")
    # but if it's not given, fallback to log stream or stdout
    else
      Merb::Config[:log_stream] ||= STDOUT
    end
    
    nil
  end

  # Default encoding to UTF8 if it has not already been set to something else.
  #
  # ==== Returns
  # nil
  #
  # @api private
  def self.set_encoding
    $KCODE = 'UTF8' if $KCODE == 'NONE' || $KCODE.blank?
    nil
  end

  private

    # Determines the path for the environment configuration file
    #
    # ==== Returns
    # String:: The path to the config file for the environment
    #
    # @api private
    def self.env_config
      Merb.dir_for(:config) / "environments" / (Merb.environment + ".rb")
    end

    # Checks to see whether or not an environment configuration exists
    #
    # ==== Returns
    # Boolean:: Whether or not the environment configuration file exists.
    #
    # @api private
    def self.env_config?
      Merb.environment && File.exist?(env_config)
    end

    # Loads the environment configuration file, if it is present
    #
    # ==== Returns
    # nil
    #
    # @api private
    def self.load_env_config
      if env_config?
        STDOUT.puts "Loading #{env_config}" unless Merb.testing?
        load(env_config)
      end
      nil
    end

    # Determines the init file to use, if any.
    # By default Merb uses init.rb from application config directory.
    #
    # ==== Returns
    # nil
    #
    # @api private
    def self.initfile
      if Merb::Config[:init_file]
        Merb::Config[:init_file].chomp(".rb") + ".rb"
      else
        Merb.dir_for(:config) / "init.rb"
      end
    end

    # Loads the init file, should one exist
    #
    # ==== Returns
    # nil
    #
    # @api private
    def self.load_initfile
      if File.exists?(initfile)
        STDOUT.puts "Loading init file from #{initfile}" unless Merb.testing?
        load(initfile)
      elsif !Merb.testing?
        Merb.fatal! "You are not in a Merb application, or you are in " \
          "a flat application and have not specified the init file. If you " \
          "are trying to create a new merb application, use merb-gen app."
      end
      nil
    end
end
</code></pre>

h2. MixinSession bootloader.

<pre><code>
class Merb::BootLoader::MixinSession < Merb::BootLoader
  # Mixin the session functionality; this is done before BeforeAppLoads
  # so that SessionContainer and SessionStoreContainer can be subclassed by
  # plugin session stores for example - these need to be loaded in a
  # before_app_loads block or a BootLoader that runs after MixinSession.
  #
  # Note: access to Merb::Config is needed, so it needs to run after 
  # Merb::BootLoader::Dependencies is done.
  def self.run
    require 'merb-core/dispatch/session'
    Merb::Controller.send(:include, ::Merb::SessionMixin)
    Merb::Request.send(:include, ::Merb::SessionMixin::RequestMixin)
  end

end
</code></pre>

This simple bootloader loads up and mixes in modules into Merb::Controller and
Merb::Request. Because it should be loaded before before_app_load hooks are run
(this is by design) but after init file is loaded, it found it's place after
Dependencies bootloader.

h2. BeforeAppLoads bootloader.

BeforeAppLoads bootloader is very simple. In init file you can add procs
to be executed by Merb just before application classes are loaded. This is what
this bootloader does: iterates over stored procs and calls them. You can use
any callable object instead of block/lambda/Proc.

It's a good way to do all kind of things before the app loads: from plugins configuration
to conditional `requires` (in case env-specific init files would not satisfy your needs).

Merb::BootLoader::BeforeAppLoads (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):

<pre><code>
class Merb::BootLoader::BeforeAppLoads < Merb::BootLoader

  # Call any before_app_loads hooks that were registered via before_app_loads
  # in any plugins.
  def self.run
    Merb::BootLoader.before_load_callbacks.each { |x| x.call }
  end
end
</code></pre>


h2. LoadClasses bootloader.

This is probably the most tricky and complicated piece of code in the whole framework. 

Classes load may use one of two strategies: "classic" and forking.
Forking is not available on some platforms (Windows, JRuby are most notable) but
provides bullet-proof class reloading on platforms where Kernel#fork is supported by Ruby.

h3. "Classic" class loading strategy.

From the bird's eye view, LoadClasses bootloader does the following (at some
point in time, not exactly in this order):

 * Extends Ruby's load path with application component
	 (model, controller, lib, helper) directories.
 * Expands application component paths, loads files from resulting set.
 * Keeps track of orphaned classes: classes that could not been loaded because
   their dependencies were not met. More on this later.
 * Maps classes to files using (sigh) ObjectSpace classes list and difference
   operation.
 * Keeps track of modification time of each file every time classes are
   reloaded.
 * Removes constant and references to it in subclasses lists of classes like
   AbstractController (that tracks it's subclasses just like Merb::BootLoader).
 * Reloads router file and resets router.
 * Tries to load classes until all dependencies are met (and all classes are
   loaded) or	after load attempt total number of classes in ObjectSpace is still
   what it used to be, but set of failed classes is not empty.

h3. Forking, master/workers strategy.

When forking is used, Merb runs a master process and one or many workers that
do the job. On Ruby Enterprise Edition all processes use shared memory so forking has no extra memory footprint. On "regular" MRI memory footprint is
still very small (usually 2 to 5 megs or RAM).



h3. Some more details.

Note that this bootloader does not reload classes using timer or load and
inline templates: those routines are done by ReloadClasses, Templates and
ReloadTemplates bootloaders, respectively.

If "application" component is present in Merb::Config, it is loaded (remember,
flat and very flat applications keep application code in one file).

This particular bootloader is probably a subject of interest of people who
really care to know the underpinnings, and source says much more than any words.
So we move on.

Merb::BootLoader::LoadClasses (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):
<pre><code>
# Load all classes inside the load paths.
#
# This is used in conjunction with Merb::BootLoader::ReloadClasses to track
# files that need to be reloaded, and which constants need to be removed in
# order to reload a file.
#
# This also adds the model, controller, and lib directories to the load path,
# so they can be required in order to avoid load-order issues.
class Merb::BootLoader::LoadClasses < Merb::BootLoader
  LOADED_CLASSES = {}
  MTIMES = {}

  class << self

    # Load all classes from Merb's native load paths.
    def run
      # Add models, controllers, helpers and lib to the load path
      $LOAD_PATH.unshift Merb.dir_for(:model)
      $LOAD_PATH.unshift Merb.dir_for(:controller)
      $LOAD_PATH.unshift Merb.dir_for(:lib)
      $LOAD_PATH.unshift Merb.dir_for(:helper)

      # Load application file if it exists - for flat applications
      load_file Merb.dir_for(:application) if File.file?(Merb.dir_for(:application))
      
      # Load classes and their requirements
      Merb.load_paths.each do |component, path|
        next unless path.last && component != :application
        load_classes(path.first / path.last)
      end

      Merb::Controller.send :include, Merb::GlobalHelpers
    end
    
    # ==== Parameters
    # file<String>:: The file to load.
    def load_file(file)
      klasses = ObjectSpace.classes.dup
      load file
      LOADED_CLASSES[file] = ObjectSpace.classes - klasses
      MTIMES[file] = File.mtime(file)
    end
    
    # Load classes from given paths - using path/glob pattern.
    #
    # *paths<Array>::
    #   Array of paths to load classes from - may contain glob pattern
    def load_classes(*paths)
      orphaned_classes = []
      paths.flatten.each do |path|
        Dir[path].each do |file|
          begin
            load_file file
          rescue NameError => ne
            orphaned_classes.unshift(file)
          end
        end
      end
      load_classes_with_requirements(orphaned_classes)
    end

    # ==== Parameters
    # file<String>:: The file to reload.
    def reload(file)
      remove_file(file) { |f| load_file(f) }
    end
    
    # Reload the router to regenerate all routes.
    def reload_router!
      if File.file?(router_file = Merb.dir_for(:router) / Merb.glob_for(:router))
        Merb::Router.reset!
        reload router_file
      end
    end
    
    # ==== Parameters
    # file<String>:: The file to remove classes for.
    # &block:: A block to call with the file that has been removed.
    def remove_file(file, &block)
      Merb.klass_hashes.each {|x| x.protect_keys!}
      if klasses = LOADED_CLASSES.delete(file)
        klasses.each { |klass| remove_constant(klass) unless klass.to_s =~ /Router/ }
      end
      yield file if block_given?
      Merb.klass_hashes.each {|x| x.unprotect_keys!}
    end

    # ==== Parameters
    # const<Class>:: The class to remove.
    def remove_constant(const)
      # This is to support superclasses (like AbstractController) that track
      # their subclasses in a class variable. Classes that wish to use this
      # functionality are required to alias it to _subclasses_list. Plugins
      # for ORMs and other libraries should keep this in mind.
      superklass = const
      until (superklass = superklass.superclass).nil?
        if superklass.respond_to?(:_subclasses_list)
          superklass.send(:_subclasses_list).delete(klass)
          superklass.send(:_subclasses_list).delete(klass.to_s)
        end
      end

      parts = const.to_s.split("::")
      base = parts.size == 1 ? Object : Object.full_const_get(parts[0..-2].join("::"))
      object = parts[-1].to_s
      begin
        base.send(:remove_const, object)
        Merb.logger.debug("Removed constant #{object} from #{base}")
      rescue NameError
        Merb.logger.debug("Failed to remove constant #{object} from #{base}")
      end
    end
    
    private

    # "Better loading" of classes.  If a class fails to load due to a NameError
    # it will be added to the failed_classs stack.
    #
    # ==== Parameters
    # klasses<Array[Class]>:: Classes to load.
    def load_classes_with_requirements(klasses)
      klasses.uniq!

      while klasses.size > 0
        # Note size to make sure things are loading
        size_at_start = klasses.size

        # List of failed classes
        failed_classes = []
        # Map classes to exceptions
        error_map = {}

        klasses.each do |klass|
          klasses.delete(klass)
          begin
            load_file klass
          rescue NameError => ne
            error_map[klass] = ne
            failed_classes.push(klass)
          end
        end

        # Keep list of classes unique
        failed_classes.each { |k| klasses.push(k) unless klasses.include?(k) }

        # Stop processing if nothing loads or if everything has loaded
        if klasses.size == size_at_start && klasses.size != 0
          # Write all remaining failed classes and their exceptions to the log
          error_map.only(*failed_classes).each do |klass, e|
            Merb.logger.fatal! "Could not load #{klass}:\n\n#{e.message} - (#{e.class})\n\n#{(e.backtrace || []).join("\n")}"
          end
          raise LoadError, "Could not load #{failed_classes.inspect} (see log for details)."
        end
        break if(klasses.size == size_at_start || klasses.size == 0)
      end
    end

  end

end
</code></pre>


h2. Templates.

Templates bootloader calculates list of templates in the application and inlines
them. All supported templating engines are respected so you even can mix Erb
with Haml (but it's probably not a very good idea in general). To calculate list
of paths, Merb takes list of controllers from AbstractController, maps them to
their template roots and creates a files list using globbing.

The most interesting part is, of course, templates inlining. Template inlining
means making a method from template path that returns compiled template content.
Each templating engine plugin must define compile_template method that takes IO
object, name of the method and module.

Inlining makes templates lookup as fast as method lookup. Inlining is done at
boot time by Templates bootloader, and if no template reloading needed
(:reload_templates configuration option set to false), Merb does not go to the
filesystem at all once server is started.

Bootloader looks simple:

Merb::BootLoader::Templates (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):
<pre><code>
class Merb::BootLoader::Templates < Merb::BootLoader
  class << self

    # Loads the templates into the Merb::InlineTemplates module.
    def run
      template_paths.each do |path|
        Merb::Template.inline_template(File.open(path))
      end
    end

    # ==== Returns
    # Array[String]:: Template files found.
    def template_paths
      extension_glob = "{#{Merb::Template.template_extensions.join(',')}}"

      # This gets all templates set in the controllers template roots
      # We separate the two maps because most of controllers will have
      # the same _template_root, so it's silly to be globbing the same
      # path over and over.
      controller_view_paths = []
      Merb::AbstractController._abstract_subclasses.each do |klass|
        next if (const = Object.full_const_get(klass))._template_root.blank?
        controller_view_paths += const._template_roots.map { |pair| pair.first }
      end
      template_paths = controller_view_paths.uniq.compact.map { |path| Dir["#{path}/**/*.#{extension_glob}"] }

      # This gets the templates that might be created outside controllers
      # template roots.  eg app/views/shared/*
      template_paths << Dir["#{Merb.dir_for(:view)}/**/*.#{extension_glob}"] if Merb.dir_for(:view)

      template_paths.flatten.compact.uniq
    end
  end
end
</code></pre>

The key part of inlining is inline_template that delegates to templating engine.
Here's what it looks like for Erubis:

Merb::Template::Erubis (lib/merb-core/controller/template.rb):
<pre><code>
# ==== Parameters
# io<#path>:: An IO containing the full path of the template.
# name<String>:: The name of the method that will be created.
# mod<Module>:: The module that the compiled method will be placed into.
def self.compile_template(io, name, mod)
  template = ::Erubis::BlockAwareEruby.new(io.read)

  _old_verbose, $VERBOSE = $VERBOSE, nil
  template.def_method(mod, name, File.expand_path(io.path))
  $VERBOSE = _old_verbose
  
  name
end
</code></pre>

BlockAwareEruby mixes in block handling capabilities into Eruby so the answer
lies in Erubis source code:

Erubis::Evaluator::RubyEvaluator#def_method (erubis/lib/erubis/evaluator.rb):
<pre><code>
## if object is an Class or Module then define instance method to it,
## else define singleton method to it.
def def_method(object, method_name, filename=nil)
  m = object.is_a?(Module) ? :module_eval : :instance_eval
  object.__send__(m, "def #{method_name}; #{@src}; end", filename || @filename || '(erubis)')
end
</code></pre>



h2. MimeTypes bootloader.

Merb's "provides API" works with formats registred in the application. This
bootloader registres default formats Merb supports. They are JSON, HTML, XML,
YAML and text. Registred formats are stored as a hash
(available as Merb.available_mime_types) where format name (:json, :html, etc)
are keys and hash with the following keys is a value:

:accepts           : accepted MIME type, like application/xml
:transform_method  : message sent to rendered objects by MerbController#display, like :to_json
:content_type      : content type string with charset, like application/xml; charset=utf-8.
:response_headers  : Hash of response headers to set for the the mime type.
:response_block    : a block which recieves the current controller when the format is set.


Merb::BootLoader::MimeTypes (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):
<pre><code>
# Register the default MIME types:
#
# By default, the mime-types include:
# :all:: no transform, */*
# :yaml:: to_yaml, application/x-yaml or text/yaml
# :text:: to_text, text/plain
# :html:: to_html, text/html or application/xhtml+xml or application/html
# :xml:: to_xml, application/xml or text/xml or application/x-xml
# :js:: to_json, text/javascript ot application/javascript or application/x-javascript
# :json:: to_json, application/json or text/x-json
class Merb::BootLoader::MimeTypes < Merb::BootLoader

  # Registers the default MIME types.
  def self.run
    Merb.add_mime_type(:all,  nil,      %w[*/*])
    Merb.add_mime_type(:yaml, :to_yaml, %w[application/x-yaml text/yaml], :charset => "utf-8")
    Merb.add_mime_type(:text, :to_text, %w[text/plain], :charset => "utf-8")
    Merb.add_mime_type(:html, :to_html, %w[text/html application/xhtml+xml application/html], :charset => "utf-8")
    Merb.add_mime_type(:xml,  :to_xml,  %w[application/xml text/xml application/x-xml], :charset => "utf-8")
    Merb.add_mime_type(:js,   :to_json, %w[text/javascript application/javascript application/x-javascript], :charset => "utf-8")
    Merb.add_mime_type(:json, :to_json, %w[application/json text/x-json], :charset => "utf-8")
  end
end
</code></pre>


h2. MixinCookies bootloader.

This simple bootloader mix in two more modules into Merb::Controller
and Merb::Request. This makes default session store available and
sets up session object on the request.

<pre><code>
class Merb::BootLoader::Cookies < Merb::BootLoader
  
  def self.run
    require 'merb-core/dispatch/cookies'
    Merb::Controller.send(:include, Merb::CookiesMixin)
    Merb::Request.send(:include, Merb::CookiesMixin::RequestMixin)
  end
  
end
</code></pre>


h2. SetupSession bootloader.

Merb may use different session containers: memcache, cookies, memory store.
Plugins developers are welcome to add more: for instance, DataMapper, Sequel and ActiveRecord
all provide database store.

Before session container can be used, it should be registered. Registration
simply ties container name (memcache, memory, etc) with it's class.
This is one of responsibilities of this bootloader.

Once containers are registered, SetupSession bootloader mixes
in container module(s) into Merb::Controller using configuration
in init file and stored in Merb::Config.session_stores.

FIXME: what is the New Way to disable session at all?

Every method added to Merb::Session module is available on session instances so
you can add handy methods for authentication frameworks, wizards and anything
else that heavily relies on session. This module is just included into
Merb::SessionContainer by this bootloader.

class Merb::BootLoader::SetupSession < Merb::BootLoader

  # Enable the configured session container(s); any class that inherits from
  # SessionContainer will be considered by its session_store_type attribute.
  def self.run
    # Require all standard session containers.
    Dir[Merb.framework_root / "merb-core" / "dispatch" / "session" / "*.rb"].each do |file|
      base_name = File.basename(file, ".rb")
      require file unless base_name == "container" || base_name == "store_container"
    end
    
    # Set some defaults.
    Merb::Config[:session_id_key] ||= "_session_id"
    
    # List of all session_stores from :session_stores and :session_store config options.
    config_stores = Merb::Config.session_stores
    
    # Register all configured session stores - any loaded session container class
    # (subclassed from Merb::SessionContainer) will be available for registration.
    Merb::SessionContainer.subclasses.each do |class_name|
      if(store = Object.full_const_get(class_name)) && 
        config_stores.include?(store.session_store_type)
          Merb::Request.register_session_type(store.session_store_type, class_name)
      end
    end
    
    # Mixin the Merb::Session module to add app-level functionality to sessions
    Merb::SessionContainer.send(:include, Merb::Session)
  end

end



h2. AfterAppLoads bootloader.

This bootloader does a thing similar to what BeforeAppLoads bootloader does, but  for "after app loads" hooks
and, obviously, after application code is loaded.

Merb::BootLoader::AfterAppLoads (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):

<pre><code>
class Merb::BootLoader::AfterAppLoads < Merb::BootLoader

  # Call any after_app_loads hooks that were registered via after_app_loads in
  # init.rb.
  def self.run
    Merb::BootLoader.after_load_callbacks.each {|x| x.call }
  end
end
</code></pre>


h2. ChooseAdapter bootloader.

This bootloder finds Rack adapter class using adapter configuration option and
assigns it to Merb.adapter.

Adapters can be found under lib/merb-core/rack/adapters. At the moment of
writing Merb core has adapters for Mongrel, Thin, Ebb, Evented Mongrel,
Swiftiplied Mongrel, Fast CGI and Webrick.

Adapters are automatically loaded first time constant is required (using
autoload).

<pre><code>
class Merb::BootLoader::ChooseAdapter < Merb::BootLoader

  # Choose the Rack adapter/server to use and set Merb.adapter.
  def self.run
    Merb.adapter = Merb::Rack::Adapter.get(Merb::Config[:adapter])
  end
end
</code></pre>


h2. StartWorkerThread bootloader.

Merb has a background thread that executes tasks in it's queue. This bootloader
starts this thread.

<pre><code>
class Merb::BootLoader::StartWorkerThread < Merb::BootLoader

  # Choose the Rack adapter/server to use and set Merb.adapter.
  def self.run
    Merb::Worker.new
  end
end
</code></pre>


h2. RackUpApplication bootloader.

RackUpApplication bootloader loads rackup file and sets Merb::Config[:app].
If Merb::Config[:rackup] is nil, Merb tries to find rack.rb file under config
directory. Once loaded, Merb uses it to set Rack adapter and middleware
More on Rack machinery in chapter on Rack. If rackup file is not found, Merb
uses default middleware bundled in merb-core.

Merb::BootLoader::RackUpApplication (merb-core/lib/bootloader.rb):

<pre><code>
  class Merb::BootLoader::RackUpApplication < Merb::BootLoader
  # Setup the Merb Rack App or read a rackup file located at
  # Merb::Config[:rackup] with the same syntax as the
  # rackup tool that comes with rack. Automatically evals the file in
  # the context of a Rack::Builder.new { } block. Allows for mounting
  # additional apps or middleware.
  def self.run
    require 'rack'
    if File.exists?(Merb.dir_for(:config) / "rack.rb")
      Merb::Config[:rackup] ||= Merb.dir_for(:config) / "rack.rb"
    end

    if Merb::Config[:rackup]
      rackup_code = File.read(Merb::Config[:rackup])
      Merb::Config[:app] = eval("::Rack::Builder.new {( #{rackup_code}\n )}.to_app", TOPLEVEL_BINDING, Merb::Config[:rackup])
    else
      Merb::Config[:app] = ::Rack::Builder.new {
         if prefix = ::Merb::Config[:path_prefix]
           use Merb::Rack::PathPrefix, prefix
         end
         use Merb::Rack::Static, Merb.dir_for(:public)
         run Merb::Rack::Application.new
       }.to_app
    end
  end
end
</code></pre>


h2. ReloadClasses bootloader.

This bootloader starts TimedExecutor instance that reload classes periodically.
What the period is? Merb::Config[:reload_time] value. ReloadClasses checks file
modification time and reloads classes in that file delegating to LoadClasses
bootloader.

Merb::BootLoader::ReloadClasses (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):

<pre><code>
class Merb::BootLoader::ReloadClasses < Merb::BootLoader

  class TimedExecutor
    def self.every(seconds, &block)
      Thread.abort_on_exception = true
      Thread.new do
        loop do
          sleep( seconds )
          block.call
        end
        Thread.exit
      end
    end
  end

  # Setup the class reloader if it's been specified in config.
  def self.run
    return unless Merb::Config[:reload_classes]

    TimedExecutor.every(Merb::Config[:reload_time] || 0.5) do
      reload
    end
    
  end

  # Reloads all files.
  def self.reload
    paths = []
    Merb.load_paths.each do |path_name, file_info|
      path, glob = file_info
      next unless glob
      paths << Dir[path / glob]
    end

    paths << Merb.dir_for(:application) if Merb.dir_for(:application) && File.file?(Merb.dir_for(:application))

    paths.flatten.each do |file|
      next if Merb::BootLoader::LoadClasses::MTIMES[file] && Merb::BootLoader::LoadClasses::MTIMES[file] == File.mtime(file)
      Merb::BootLoader::LoadClasses.reload(file)
    end
  end
end
</code></pre>


h2. ReloadTemplates bootloader.

This bootloader is supposed to reload templates but at the moment of writing it
just sets Merb::Config[:reload_templates] to true if environment Merb
application runs in is development.

Merb::BootLoader::ReloadTemplates (lib/merb-core/bootloader.rb):

<pre><code>
class Merb::BootLoader::ReloadTemplates < Merb::BootLoader

  # Reloads all templates if the reload_templates key has been set in config.
  def self.run
    unless Merb::Config.key?(:reload_templates)
      Merb::Config[:reload_templates] = (Merb.environment == "development")
    end
  end
end
</code></pre>
