h1. Rack machinery in Merb.

Once bootloaders are all run, Merb starts Rack adapter and requests can be
served from this very moment. Now it's time to have a look how Merb uses Rack
under the covers to greatly simplify support for variety of pluggable
middleware, web servers and multiple application layouts.

h2. What is Rack?

Rack README states that Rack is "a modular Ruby web server interface". Some say
Rack is a Ruby webserver abstraction. It's heavily inspired by Python's WSGI
(Web Server Gateway Interface) which is a
"standard":http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0333/ in Python world.


h2. What? Web server interface?

The rationale of WSGI can be summarized to one sentence from PEP333:

"This wide variety of choices can be a problem for new Python users, because
generally speaking, their choice of web framework will limit their choice of
usable web servers, and vice versa.".

In a post-Rails world there is a dozen of Ruby web frameworks and until Rack was
created by Christian Neukirchen they all were doing duplicate work on web
servers support and common operations. If your deployment environment runs web server X, you only could use
frameworks that support X, and no others. Rack gives frameworks and web servers
developers universal unified interface.


h2. Get yourself familiar with roots.

I'd highly re-comment reading "original WSGI
PEP":http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0333 before you continue reading this
chapter.


h2. Rack applications.

Framework side of specification is implemented by Rack applications. Rack
application is any callable object (that responds to :call message) that takes
Rack environment and returns an array of three elements:

 * response status string
 * hash of response headers
 * response body object

Response object *must* respond to each, so in Ruby 1.8 string is a valid
response object and nil is not. This simple requirement means you can return an
IO object that will stream data to the client.

Rack environment is a hash of CGI-like headers. You can find details in
"Rack specification":http://rack.rubyforge.org/doc/files/SPEC.html.


h2. Middleware.

In the middle, after client is connected to the server but before framework
starts serving it there maybe be any number of components called "middleware".
Merb comes with middleware for serving static files (good for development, in
production, of course, consider using nginx or something similar), profiling and
path prefixes handling.

Middleware wraps a Rack application, does some work (profiles, sends notifications,
tries to serve certain files without triggering the framework, etc) and calls the
application if necessary. You can think of Rack middleware as of highly reusable
filters that run outside of framework dispatch process.

Frameworks like Django and Pylons use middleware for all sorts of stuff, from
conditional get support to csrf attacks protection to session setup and finalization.


h2. Adapters.

Rack adapters connect web server interfaces with Merb Rack application that takes
the environment and passes it to Merb dispatcher. Since different web servers
have different APIs, Merb comes with a bunch of adapters: for Mongrel, Thin,
Ebb, Thin with Thin-Turbo backend, Evented Mongrel, Swiftiplied Mongrel, FastCGI, CGI, Webrick.

Adapter's responsibility is to start the web server using Merb application configuration
(port, host, process user and group, etc) and call Merb Rack application when request
comes in.

Merb uses common API for all adapters that start and stop web server, and also provides
spawner/workers run model. Merb runs spawner process that monitors worker processes that
do actual request handling. This monitoring is built into merb-core, is very lightweight
and provide bullet proof and thread safe class reloading: when you change your application
code and class reloading is turned on, Merb spawner respawns workers. This eliminates
most of complexity from class reloading process that used to involved heavy usage
of slow ObjectSpace and multiple reloading cycles to satisfy all interdependencies classes
have.

As a side effect of spawner/worker model you can distinguish between workers in the log
that may be very useful information to have sometimes: you can see what causes workers
to crash just by looking at what worker logged just before it crashed.

Abstract adapter code is quite large and can be found in
lib/merb-core/rack/adapter/abstract.rb.

Thin adapter is simpler to understand, so lets have a look at it.
Here is what Thin adapter looks like:

<pre><code>
require "thin"

module Merb

  module Rack

    class Thin < Merb::Rack::AbstractAdapter
      # start a Thin server on given host and port.

      def self.new_server(port)
        Merb::Dispatcher.use_mutex = false
        
        if @opts[:socket] || @opts[:socket_file]
          socket = port.to_s
          socket_file = @opts[:socket_file] || "#{Merb.root}/log/merb.#{socket}.sock"
          Merb.logger.warn!("Using Thin adapter with socket file #{socket_file}.")
          @server = ::Thin::Server.new(socket_file, @opts[:app], @opts)
        else
          Merb.logger.warn!("Using Thin adapter on host #{@opts[:host]} and port #{port}.")
          if @opts[:host].include?('/')
            @opts[:host] = "#{@opts[:host]}-#{port}"
          end
          @server = ::Thin::Server.new(@opts[:host], port, @opts[:app], @opts)
        end
      end

      def self.start_server
        ::Thin::Logging.silent = true
        @server.start
      end
      
      def self.stop(status = 0)
        if @server
          @server.stop
          true
        end
      end
    end
  end
end
</code></pre>

What this does is starts Thin using host/port or socket and passes it an instance of Merb Rack application
that knows how to pass incoming requests to Merb dispatcher. Pretty simple.

Here is Merb Rack application I referred to a number of times already:

<pre><code>
module Merb  
  module Rack
    class Application
      
      # The main rack application call method.  This is the entry point from rack (and the webserver) 
      # to your application.  
      #
      # ==== Parameters
      # env<Hash>:: A rack request of parameters.  
      #
      # ==== Returns
      # <Array>:: A rack response of [status<Integer>, headers<Hash>, body<String, Stream>]
      #
      # :api: private
      def call(env) 
        begin
          rack_response = ::Merb::Dispatcher.handle(Merb::Request.new(env))
        rescue Object => e
          return [500, {Merb::Const::CONTENT_TYPE => Merb::Const::TEXT_SLASH_HTML}, e.message + Merb::Const::BREAK_TAG + e.backtrace.join(Merb::Const::BREAK_TAG)]
        end
        Merb.logger.info Merb::Const::DOUBLE_NEWLINE
        Merb.logger.flush

        # unless controller.headers[Merb::Const::DATE]
        #   require "time"
        #   controller.headers[Merb::Const::DATE] = Time.now.rfc2822.to_s
        # end
        rack_response
      end

      # Determines whether this request is a "deferred_action", usually a long request. 
      # Rack uses this method to determine whether to use an evented request or a deferred
      # request in evented rack handlers.  
      #
      # ==== Parameters
      # env<Hash>:: The rack request
      #
      # ==== Returns
      # Boolean::
      #   True if the request should be deferred.  
      #
      # :api: private
      def deferred?(env)
        path = env[Merb::Const::PATH_INFO] ? env[Merb::Const::PATH_INFO].chomp(Merb::Const::SLASH) : Merb::Const::EMPTY_STRING
        if path =~ Merb.deferred_actions
          Merb.logger.info! "Deferring Request: #{path}"
          true
        else
          false
        end        
      end # deferred?(env)
    end # Application
  end # Rack
end # Merb
</code></pre>

It has one addition over vanilla Rack application: deferred? method. This is used by event-driven servers
(currently Thin and Ebb) to figure out that request should be deferred (run in a thread) instead of running
it in main reactor loop. This allows event-driven servers handle long requests without blocking
the event loop (and thus take best of both worlds: better performance of even-driven
servers for short requests in the even loop and threading for longer requests).

Short cut from Thin::Connection source code:

<pre><code>
# +true+ if <tt>app.call</tt> will be called inside a thread.
# You can set all requests as threaded setting <tt>Connection#threaded=true</tt>
# or on a per-request case returning +true+ in <tt>app.deferred?</tt>.
def threaded?
  @threaded || (@app.respond_to?(:deferred?) && @app.deferred?(@request.env))
end
</code></pre>

And yes, this means web server authors should be aware of this feature since
it goes beyong Rack specification, but at the time of writing (August 2008)
two major players in Ruby event-driven servers space (Thin and Ebb) do support it.

	 
h2. Rackup.

Rack has it's "own init" file often referred to as "rackup file". Conventional
extension of this file is .ru, though you may use .rb or anything else, as long
as it is a valid Ruby code.

Rackup file sets up middleware stack: what middleware runs in what order.
It usually maps URLs to middleware and applications, and constructed using
special DSL implemented within a Rack::Builder class.

Rack source code provides the following example of using Rack::Builder:

<pre><code>
app = Rack::Builder.new {
  use Rack::CommonLogger
  use Rack::ShowExceptions
  map "/lobster" do
    use Rack::Lint
    run Rack::Lobster.new
  end
}
</code></pre>

It stacks two middleware components, Rack::CommonLogger and Rack::ShowExceptions,
and maps URL /lobster to Rack::Lobster application (that shows and
rotates lobster image).

Keep in mind that Rack middleware run order matters just like filters order
in Merb application does matter.


h1. Rack middleware examples.

Rack middleware in Rack source repository is very much like Mongrel handlers
but with unified application interface. You can use them as examples or in some
certain situations in production applications.

h2. Rack::URLMap.

Rack::URLMap is an application from Rack suite that maps paths
relative to the root of the server to application instances.
When environment is passed in, paths are checked
and application with longest matching path is called.

h2. Rack::Deflater

Rack::Deflater compresses body of the response. It runs after framework finished
processing the request.

h2. Merb::Rack::ConditionalGet

A rip off of Django's conditional get WSGI middleware.


h1. How Merb does the rackup.

Remember Rackup bootloader from previous chapter? It looks like this:

Merb::BootLoader::RackUpApplication (merb-core/lib/bootloader.rb):

<pre><code>
  class Merb::BootLoader::RackUpApplication < Merb::BootLoader
  # Setup the Merb Rack App or read a rackup file located at
  # Merb::Config[:rackup] with the same syntax as the
  # rackup tool that comes with rack. Automatically evals the file in
  # the context of a Rack::Builder.new { } block. Allows for mounting
  # additional apps or middleware.
  def self.run
    require 'rack'
    if File.exists?(Merb.dir_for(:config) / "rack.rb")
      Merb::Config[:rackup] ||= Merb.dir_for(:config) / "rack.rb"
    end

    if Merb::Config[:rackup]
      rackup_code = File.read(Merb::Config[:rackup])
      Merb::Config[:app] = eval("::Rack::Builder.new {( #{rackup_code}\n )}.to_app", TOPLEVEL_BINDING, Merb::Config[:rackup])
    else
      Merb::Config[:app] = ::Rack::Builder.new {
         if prefix = ::Merb::Config[:path_prefix]
           use Merb::Rack::PathPrefix, prefix
         end
         use Merb::Rack::Static, Merb.dir_for(:public)
         run Merb::Rack::Application.new
       }.to_app
    end
  end
end
</code></pre>


What it does is setting up Rack applications stack web server is going to use.
Merb Rack application instance is stored in Merb::Config[:app].
When bootloader is done, web server adapter is started: it listens to host and
port, processes requests using middleware stack that end up calling
Merb Rack application stored in Merb::Config[:app].

API of web server adapters for Merb are actually very simple: they should have
a class method start that takes a Hash of options. Options may vary from web
server to web server but one of them is :app option: again, this is Merb Rack
application.

Default middleware stack Merb uses includes path prefix and static files middleware.


h2. Stream wrapper.

Since Ebb and Thin originally did not provide streaming capabilities,
Merb uses one more abstraction layer to fix this inconvenience.
The class used is Merb::Rack::StreamWrapper that wraps a response body
and handles iteration over it, comparison and writing to the buffer
nicely.

Code lives in lib/merb-core/rack/stream_wrapper.rb.