h1. Content negotiation.

Content negotiation is a term used in HTTP specification. HTTP client (like
a browser) and HTTP server (not really a server itself but applications
that server serves) negotiate over content type or format which server
will provide to the client as a response.

In other words, whether server sends back HTML, JSON, XML, iCal, YAML
or some other format (including video, images, audio and so forth).

Here Merb borrows idea of "formats" from Ruby on Rails. Merb applications
provide one or many representation of the same resource (again, this is
all from HTTP specification) and representation client asks for is
known as "format" in request cycle.

Magic that makes provides API and .xml, .json and other suffixes in
resource routes run is spread between 2 parts of the code base.
One is content negotiation module itself that figures out what
format is the most appropriate for the client (depending on number of
factors covered later in this chapter), and another is formats registry
that keeps track of formats registered in the application.

Format is just a synonim for content type that human beings can
easily remember. We mostly care about if it is JSON or XML rather
than if it is application/xml or application/json. Every format
has associated content types string, a method name Merb uses when
it tries to present entities in the application in the format
client requested, and... this is pretty much it.

If you return to boot chapter, you may find that you already
seen a bit of code in Merb core that has something to deal with
content negotiation. It's in MimeTypes bootloader that sets up
default formats Merb applications may provide:

* html
* json
* javascript
* xml
* yaml
* text

They all have different Accept header values associated with them.
Accept header is what is used by the framework to figure out
what to serve to the client. No surprises here.

What is really interesting to Merb hacker here is that part
that performs content negotiation. It is a Merb::ResponderMixin
that does the job. It is mixed into controllers and is
resposible for keeping track of provided formats, as well as
figuring out requested format name.

Code lives in lib/merb-core/controller/mixins/responder.rb.
Here is the method that takes a request and returns requested
format name:

<code>
<pre>
def _perform_content_negotiation
  if (fmt = params[:format]) && !fmt.empty?
    accepts = [fmt.to_sym]
  elsif request.accept =~ %r{^(text/html|\*/\*)} && _provided_formats.first == :html
    # Handle the common case of text/html and :html provided after checking :format
    return :html
  else
    accepts = Responder.parse(request.accept).map {|t| t.to_sym}.compact
  end
  
  # no need to make a bunch of method calls to _provided_formats
  provided_formats = _provided_formats
  
  specifics = accepts & provided_formats
  return specifics.first unless specifics.length == 0
  return provided_formats.first if accepts.include?(:all) && !provided_formats.empty?
  
  message  = "A format (%s) that isn't provided (%s) has been requested. "
  message += "Make sure the action provides the format, and be "
  message += "careful of before filters which won't recognize "
  message += "formats provided within actions."
  raise Merb::ControllerExceptions::NotAcceptable,
    (message % [accepts.join(', '), provided_formats.join(', ')])
end
</pre>
</code>

Content negotiation involves a sequnce of steps:
1. if params[:format] is there, and provided, it is used
2. Otherwise Accept header is parsed
3. If it's */*, the first provided format is used
4. If not, Merb looks for one that is provided, in order of request
5. 406 status is set and exception is raised if none found.

406 is Not Acceptable.

Another use of registered formats is to set content type header
when response is rendered:
<code>
<pre>
def content_type=(type)
  unless Merb.available_mime_types.has_key?(type)
    raise Merb::ControllerExceptions::NotAcceptable.new("Unknown content_type for response: #{type}") 
  end

  @_content_type = type

  mime = Merb.available_mime_types[type]
  
  headers["Content-Type"] = mime[:content_type]
  
  # merge any format specific response headers
  mime[:response_headers].each { |k,v| headers[k] ||= v }
  
  # if given, use a block to finetune any runtime headers
  mime[:response_block].call(self) if mime[:response_block]

  @_content_type
end
</pre>
</code>

Note that in 1.0.x every single rendering method uses content_type=
method internally, so rendering automatically means setting content type
header and if you expect to set that header manually, don't be
surprised.

Accept header parsing is not really elegant but may be of interest
to the reader so I provide two tiny classes that do the job. It is
in the same responder.rb.

<code>
<pre>
class Responder
  def self.parse(accept_header)
    headers = accept_header.split(/,/)
    idx, list = 0, []
    while idx < headers.size
      list << AcceptType.new(headers[idx], idx)
      idx += 1
    end
    list.sort
  end
end

class AcceptType
  attr_reader :media_range, :quality, :index, :type, :sub_type
  def initialize(entry,index)
    @index = index
    
    entry =~ /\s*([^;\s]*)\s*(;\s*q=\s*(.*))?/
    @media_range, quality = $1, $3
    
    @type, @sub_type = @media_range.split(%r{/})
    (quality ||= 0.0) if @media_range == "*/*"
    @quality = quality ? (quality.to_f * 100).to_i : 100
    @quality *= (mime && mime[:default_quality] || 1)
  end
  
  def <=>(entry)
    if entry.quality == quality
      @index <=> entry.index
    else
      entry.quality <=> @quality
    end
  end

  def eql?(entry)
    synonyms.include?(entry.media_range)
  end

  def ==(entry); eql?(entry); end

  def hash; super_range.hash; end

  def synonyms
    return @syns if @syns
    if _mime = mime
      @syns = _mime[:accepts]
    else
      @syns = []
    end
  end
  
  def mime
    @mime ||= Merb.available_mime_types[Merb::ResponderMixin::MIMES[@media_range]]
  end

  def super_range
    synonyms.first || @media_range
  end

  def to_sym
    Merb.available_mime_types.select{|k,v| 
      v[:accepts] == synonyms || v[:accepts][0] == synonyms[0]}.flatten.first
  end

  def to_s
    @media_range
  end
end
</pre>
</code>

h2. Where to look next.

Next thing you may want to look at is all the gory details
of rendering engine.